Wind saw the studied inventiveness and performative engagement of the artistic generation of the 1960s compensating, or perhaps overcompensating, for the procedural methods of formalism—methods which had been developed in order to stabilize historical claims by adjusting the historian’s subjective access to objectively existing instances of social communicability through form, albeit at the cost of losing some degree of investment in art’s emotional value. One result was, arguably, to diminish the idea that criticism was, as Northrop Frye contended in 1949, “a structure of thought and knowledge existing in its own right, with some measure of independence from the art it deals with. The assumption that art criticism is an autonomous sphere of activity, the judgments of which should avoid extra-artistic frameworks and key themselves to a framework derived from an inductive survey of current practices of art, now appears hopelessly anachronistic. Indeed, the critical pressure put upon the fundamental assumptions of disciplinary cohesion by poststructuralist critics since the 1960s has all but eroded the idea that art criticism can legitimately identify its own objects of inquiry or even demarcate its own boundaries. This condition reflects our current skepticism of systematic structures of knowledge—we can’t make the assumption of total coherence for art criticism, as Frye might have, because “criticism” has become at best a generality without any organizing principle. The art critical text is thus now defined by its “heterogeneity, multiplicity, and dispersion. We witness a proliferation of frameworks that complements what Wind noticed as the renunciation of “imaginative” synthesis in preference for the establishing an objective “historical grammar. Both circumstances contribute to the erosion of belief in the passionate recovery of historical meaning, the restoration and fusion of subjective perspectives.
Thus readers will find James Elkins, in an accessible and highly useful introduction to the state of art criticism published in 2003, stridently remarking that “art criticism is in a worldwide crisis. Part of the reason this is the case, he says, is that while art criticism is produced in ever increasing amounts and bolstered by ever increasing opportunities for distribution (journals, magazines, gallery brochures, blogspots, and so on), no one really takes it seriously. Art criticism is “massively produced, and massively ignored”; it is in a state of “vigorous health and terminal illness. Elkins would prefer a situation, it is fair to say, of reciprocity, in which art criticism is taken seriously by interested readers who are somewhat informed in the history of art criticism, art history, aesthetics, and art education and can participate in contemporary intellectual debates as they appear. But Elkins acknowledges that the sheer volume of art criticism is “outstripping its readers. He continues: “[T]here is more of it around than anyone can read [we] can’t read everything. Yet Elkins concludes his short book by suggesting an impossible proscription: for a vital art critical dialogue, “all that is required is that everyone read everything. Each writer, no matter what their place and purpose, should have an endless bibliography, and know every pertinent issue and claim. We should all read until our eyes are bleary, and we should read both ambitiously and also indiscriminately. Whether or not this proscription would advance or hinder the development of art criticism is an open question.
To inquire into the “state” of art criticism expresses an interest not only in defining what art criticism is, or in finding the limits or parameters of art critical practice; it also expresses an interest in making some kind of judgment about the condition such a practice—art criticism, if it is defined—generally finds itself in. However, a definition of criticism, and an evaluation of its state, might appear to mitigate the heterogeneity of art critical practices, making them appear similar and uniform. As some historians have argued, the birth of art criticism as a literary genre in mid-eighteenth-century France and its extension into a variety of forms of “Kunstliteratur” in the nineteenth (museum guides, exhibition reviews, travel accounts, monographs, historical studies, art correspondence) anticipated its modern heterogeneity and multiplicity. Historically, then, art criticism is characterized exactly by its lack of codification: one does not have to prepare to be an art critic by engaging in any specific professional training; art criticism has no common rules; no common set of objects to which it applies; it does not share a standard mode of writing, presentational format, or rhetorical conventions; it is not located in a single place. By all accounts, criticism has no “internal coherence,” as Michael Orwicz has pointed out. Still, this heterogeneity is frequently taken a sign of health. In his Assessment, Julian Stallabrass takes art criticism’s “fundamental lack of clarity” and the “ ‘undecidability’ of its objects” to be its greatest virtue. So why worry about a “state”?
Perhaps because, as Lane Relyea indicates in this volume, “The terms that underwrote an older conception of criticism—notions of the public, of culture, of value—are in deep crisis, seemingly indistinguishable today from naming mere market functions in our transnational capitalist economy. If the recent history of roundtables and publications on art criticism is any indication, there is a shared sense that criticism is in a crisis, unsure of its place and function within society. Perhaps this is a problem with defining an audience: it is not clear who reads criticism, nor what is expected from it. Or perhaps this a problem with disciplinary boundaries: it is not clear what criticism is, what it should address itself to, and what (if any) standards it should hold itself to (and who would define those standards in the first place?). Reading over the roundtable discussions and responses to them, what becomes evident is the uncertainty many individuals have over whether it is worthwhile—were it even possible—to reform criticism. Of course, the parameters of this reform are an open question, but there does seem to be a common desire, articulated by Katy Siegel in another context, to see art critics “try to understand the social and historical conditions that they experience as the crisis of art criticism. Doing so might imbue criticism with a relevance greater than it enjoys at present.
What are the conditions under which such understanding and writing can occur? Does it require the anticipation of a readership, or a secure understanding of the constituency of the audience that is being addressed? Some respondents certainly think so: “Art audiences and art writing constantly intersect,” says Robert Enright in his Assessment, “and one of the prerequisites of good criticism is figuring out who you are writing for and in what way. According to Elkins, the audience for art criticism is unable to keep up with its production. So his call for everyone to read everything might be a way to increase the opportunities for art criticism of quality to emerge. Increasing the amount readers interested in art read is one way to solve the problem of art critics, a problem Elkins identifies in naming the title of the first chapter of his book What Happened to Art Criticism (partly reprinted here as a Starting Point essay) “Writing without Readers. If understood from the point of view of a critic who wants to make a connection with an audience, who writes for a possible or imagined readership, writing without readers is an unfortunate situation. It is especially problematic for the market, which relies on criticism to provide marks of distinction to artists in an overcrowded system, to advance their careers, and to turn a profit. But why should the audience matter? It is only convention that stresses the importance of one’s writing for a communicative exchange with another person. If understood from the point of view of an individual writing for no audience, then the situation might provide a salutary effect. In isolating one’s practice of writing from the external forces which shape its reception, and its meaning—to the extent such isolation is possible, if one decides it is desirable—one writes within a space that is relatively free of those constraints explicitly or implicitly imposed by audience that would limit what could be written. Of course, this freedom is never absolute—one always writes for readers, even if just one. The circuits of identification and projection which propel writing demand as much. And of course, the rebuttal argument would be that such hermetic writing no longer counts as criticism.
Assertions can function as a stimulus for discussion. Art criticism aims to understand, through the description and evaluation of artworks, broader aspects of experience than those usually associated with art as a semi-autonomous sphere of activity generated by and responsive to its own demarcated historicity. Simply put, art criticism can reveal through its handling of artworks a spectrum of concerns confronted by individuals or groups at different times and in different contexts: from attitudes towards concrete historical situations or dynamics, to more abstruse categories such as embodiment. The veracity of the first part of this claim is based on the assumption that a connection exists between society and human forms of expression; that of the second, on the idea that all conditions of viewing are physiologically or psychologically grounded. In regard to the first, it is perhaps unnecessary to reiterate that a fundamental hypothesis in the development of the idea of culture is that the art of a period reflects the general worldview of that period. The idea that the art of an era and the society which produced it are integrally bound together is one of the defining characteristics of our current scholarship within the discipline of art history, and is arguably the premier methodological—and ideological—configuration of modern historical inquiry. An important implication of this connection for art criticism is that aesthetic judgments are inseparable from social and ethical judgments. Michael Orwicz has found this to be definitive: “Criticism is generally differentiated from the fields of aesthetics and art history by virtue of the values (explicit or not) that art-critical judgment seeks to mobilize, and the defined position from which the critic speaks. It is precisely its mobilization of judgments of value concerning works of art that constitutes the specificity of the art-critical text. The question emerges: is contemporary art criticism characterized by its capacity to articulate this correspondence, and to imbue its pronouncements with a moral authority? Does art criticism, as it is practiced in its various “publication vehicles” (as Dario Gamboni has called the network of texts that feature and distribute criticism) regularly attain the insights into society (and concomitant insights into the ethical character of that society) characteristic of the best criticism?
A first example. John Ruskin was a key figure in the establishment of a mode of criticism that understands—and judges—society through interpreting its cultural artifacts, its forms of expression. What makes him a compelling figure to return to in any discussion of contemporary criticism is that his personal commitments enabled him to think that contemporary, as much as historical, forms of expression and the way we interpret them were not just consequences of unchangeable historical conditions, but were rather instances, and instruments, of a transformative cultural program. Ruskin, looking back from the vantage point of a society undergoing rapid change to a time he perceived as more holistic (the Middle Ages), attempted to save or revitalize an organic mode of living, thinking, and feeling he thought was being eradicated by technologies of industrial mechanization. This mode of being might be characterized as one of fullness or directness, perhaps as one of honesty and truthfulness. Ruskin did not advocate a return to the middle ages; he neither wanted the life nor the decorations of the thirteenth century back again. But he was nonetheless cognizant of a loss he hoped could be recuperated by criticism. Progress entails an erasure of former modes of thinking as well as of behaving. Recognizing what was being lost from the past was most important to Ruskin, and it is this sensitivity that informs much of his thought about art. His writings are best read as an attempt to preserve or reinstate modes of consciousness that were imagined to be more fulfilling and genuine than the alternative—the increased atomization or quantification of all aspects of life, drained of any qualitative moral or spiritual significance and ultimately devoid of human meaning.
A second example. Walter Pater, writing about Winckelmann’s legacy as the figure who transmitted to Goethe the “true essence” of Greek art, noticed that the features Winckelmann discerned in Hellenic culture, namely “breadth, centrality, with blindness and repose,” were more evident to us now than they perhaps were even at the time. “The local, accidental colouring of its own age has passed from it,” Pater wrote, “and the greatness that is dead looks greater when the link with what is slight and vulgar has been severed. If Winckelmann restored to Goethe not just a plausible but an authentic and viable understanding of Hellenic culture, Pater’s criticism of Winckelmann concentrates and intensifies that understanding. In so doing, Pater reveals Winckelmann to be exemplary of his own eighteenth-century moment; simultaneously, Pater’s own work may become for the sensitive critic not only a passage to what is true about Winckelmann (or the Greeks for that matter), but also an exemplification of the historical truth of Pater’s Victorianism. In both moves, from Pater to Winckelmann, and from our critic to Pater, writing restores to the reader a sense of historical veracity, refracted, as it always must be, through a lens of subjectivism. But this subjectivism can, in critical practice, convert into what Whitney Davis has called a “plausible historical psychology,” in which the critic approximates, identifies, or articulates a fully historical account of how people other than ourselves understood the world.
Whether or not it is desirable to accept these models of ethical criticism from our postmodern standpoint, characterized by skepticism and disbelief more than by conviction and faith, their relevance for contemporary debates lies in their self-reflexivness—in Ruskin’s or Pater’s attempt to grasp simultaneously their own (present) situational context and a (past) horizon of meaning. Interpreting the past, these critics substantially record their own attitudes and judgments. But readers sense that this historical refraction is more substantial than the form of cultural critique often characteristic of ephemeral art criticism, with all its recognition of its own institutional, ideological, and discursive frameworks. Focusing on positionality, or framing, can be beneficial under conditions that are sensed to prevent, or to inhibit, inquiry and evaluation of a cultural situation. We might expect such a condition to be present when the amount of material or information under consideration reaches a point of maximum availability. Facing an overabundance of evidence, critics are neither able to discern, nor to present, a synthetic picture—a meaningful representation—of the most important features of a given cultural moment. Unmanageability becomes a symptom of a defunct critical procedure. It may be compensated for by self-reflexivness, distinct from strategies of reflective positioning, which replaces external constraints on writing (for instance, pressures to adhere to conventions of presenting historical evidence in an argument) with internal ones (for instance, the regulation of writing by a keen sense of personal desire).